docs/sections/user_guide/yaml/rocoto.rst, before:

.. _defining_a_workflow:

Defining a Rocoto Workflow
==========================

:rocoto:`Rocoto<>` is a workflow manager widely used by :ufs:`UFS<>` users and developers. It uses a custom XML language to define a set of tasks, their computational resource needs on a batch system, and their dependencies.

To date, it has been challenging to manage XML files that must support a multitude of workflow options. The ``uw rocoto`` tool defines a UW YAML language that can be easily manipulated like any other key/value configuration file and translates it into the syntax required by Rocoto. This enables flexibility to arbitrarily make changes to any workflow while UFS Apps can track the highest priority configurations for Community and Operational use.

Workflow Section
----------------

Starting at the top level of the UW YAML config for Rocoto, there are several required sections. See the example and explanation below:

.. code-block:: yaml

   workflow:
     attrs:
       realtime: false
       scheduler: slurm
     cycledef:
       - attrs:
           activation_offset: -06:00
           group: howdy
         spec: 202209290000 202209300000 06:00:00
     entities:
       ACCOUNT: myaccount
       FOO: test.log
     log: /some/path/to/&FOO;
     tasks:
       ...

UW YAML Keys
^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. note::

   For additional information on Rocoto tags mentioned in this section (e.g., ``<workflow>``, ``<cycledef>``, ``<log>``), please see the :rocoto:`Rocoto documentation<>`.

``attrs:`` -- This section allows users to define any number of the available attributes to the ``<workflow>`` tag in Rocoto's native XML language. Set each with a key/value that matches the exact syntax needed by :rocoto:`Rocoto<>`. These attributes work to fill in the ``<workflow>`` tag. For example:

.. code-block:: xml

   <workflow realtime="false" scheduler="slurm">
   ...
   </workflow>

``cycledef:`` -- This section is a list of grouped cycle definitions for a workflow. Any number of ``cycledef:`` keys is supported. Similar to ``attrs:`` for the ``workflow:`` level, this section has an ``attrs:`` key that follows the exact requirements of those in the Rocoto XML language. The ``spec:`` key is required and supports either the "start, stop, step" syntax, or the "crontab-like" method supported by Rocoto. The example above translates to a single ``<cycledef>`` tag:

.. code-block:: xml

   <cycledef group="howdy">202209290000 202209300000 06:00:00</cycledef>

``entities:`` -- This section defines key/value pairs --- each rendered as ``<!ENTITY key "value">`` --- to translate to named entities (variables) in XML. The example above would yield:

.. code-block:: xml

   <?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
   <!DOCTYPE workflow [
     <!ENTITY ACCOUNT "myaccount">
     <!ENTITY FOO "test.log">
   ]>

``log:`` -- This is a path-like string that defines where to put the Rocoto logs. It corresponds to the ``<log>`` tag. For example:

.. code-block:: xml

   <log>/some/path/to/&FOO;</log>

``tasks:`` -- This section is explained in the `Tasks Section`_.

Using Cycle Strings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``<cyclestr>`` tag in Rocoto transforms specific flags to represent components of the current cycle at run time. For example, an ISO date string like ``2023-01-01T12:00:00`` is represented as ``'@Y-@m-@dT@X'``. See the :rocoto:`Rocoto documentation<>` for full details. In the UW YAML, the ``cyclestr:`` block can be used anywhere that Rocoto will accept a ``<cyclestr>`` to achieve this result. The required structure of a ``cyclestr:`` block is a ``value:``, like this:

.. code-block:: yaml

   entities:
     FOO: test@Y-@m-@dT@X.log
   log:
     cyclestr:
       value: /some/path/to/&FOO;

In the example, the resulting log would appear in the XML file as:

.. code-block:: xml

   <log>
     <cyclestr>/some/path/to/&FOO;</cyclestr>
   </log>

The ``attrs:`` block is optional within the ``cyclestr:`` block and can be used to specify the cycle offset.

Tasks Section
-------------

The ``tasks:`` section is a nested structure that can be arbitrarily deep and defines all the tasks and metatasks in a Rocoto workflow. One or more task or metatask keys are required in this high-level ``tasks:`` section.

Defining Tasks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Let's dissect the following task example:

.. code-block:: yaml

   task_hello:
     attrs:
       cycledefs: howdy
     account: "&ACCOUNT;"
     command: "echo hello $person"
     nodes: 1:ppn=1
     walltime: 00:01:00
     envars:
       person: siri
     dependencies:

Each task is named by its UW YAML key. Blocks under ``tasks:`` prefixed with ``task_`` will be named with what follows the prefix. In the example above the task will be named ``hello`` and will appear in the XML like this:

.. code-block:: xml

   <task name="hello" cycledefs="howdy">
     <jobname>hello</jobname>
     ...
   </task>

where the ``attrs:`` section may set any of the Rocoto-allowed XML attributes. The ``<jobname>`` tag will, by default, use the same name but may be overridden with an explicit ``jobname:`` key under the task.

The name of the task can be any string accepted by Rocoto as a task name (including additional underscores), but must contain the leading ``task_`` to be recognized as a task.

``command:`` -- The command that will be run in the batch job.

``envars:`` -- Any number of key/value pairs defining bash variable names and their corresponding values, to be exported to the environment in which ``<command>`` will run, each rendered in XML like this:

.. code-block:: xml

   <envar>
     <name>person</name>
     <value>siri</value>
   </envar>

``dependencies:`` -- [Optional] Any number of dependencies accepted by Rocoto. This section is described in more detail below.

The other keys not specifically mentioned here follow the same conventions as described in the :rocoto:`Rocoto<>` documentation.

Defining Dependencies for Tasks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Optional dependencies, structured as boolean expressions, define the readiness of a task to run. Dependency specification in YAML is described here; see the :rocoto:`Rocoto documentation<>` for more details.

UW YAML dependency key names should mirror Rocoto XML dependency tag names, optionally suffixed with an underscore followed by an arbitrary descriptor. For example, a ``<streq>`` tag might appear in YAML as ``streq_check_flag:``.

Specifying Tag Attributes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Each of the dependencies that requires attributes (the ``key="value"`` parts inside the XML tag) can be specified with an ``attrs:`` block. For example:

.. code-block:: yaml

   task_hello:
     command: "hello world"
     ...
   task_goodbye:
     command: "goodbye"
     dependencies:
        taskdep:
          attrs:
            task: hello

Here, the ``taskdep:`` dependency says that the ``goodbye`` task cannot run until the ``hello`` task is complete. The resulting Rocoto XML looks like this:

.. code-block:: xml

   <task name="hello">
     ...
   </task>
   <task name="goodbye"/>
     ...
     <dependency>
       <taskdep task="hello"/>
     </dependency>
   </task>

Repeated Dependencies and Boolean Operators
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Because UW YAML represents a hash table (a dictionary in Python), each key at the same level must be unique. To accomplish this in the UW YAML format, any of the dependencies can be specified with an arbitrary unique suffix following an underscore. When duplicates appear at the same level, they *must* have unique names. In the following example, there are multiple data dependencies for the basic ``hello`` task.

.. code-block:: yaml

   task_hello:
     command: "hello world"
     ...
     dependencies:
       and:
         datadep_foo:
           value: "foo.txt"
         datadep_bar:
           value: "bar.txt"

This would result in Rocoto XML in this form:

.. code-block:: xml

   <task name="hello"/>
     ...
     <dependency>
       <and>
         <datadep>"foo.txt"</datadep>
         <datadep>"bar.txt"</datadep>
       </and>
     </dependency>
   </task>

The ``datadep_foo:`` and ``datadep_bar:`` UW YAML keys were named arbitrarily after the first ``_``, but could have been even more descriptive such as ``datadep_foo_file:`` or ``datadep_foo_text:``. The important part is that the YAML key prefix matches the Rocoto XML tag name.

This example also demonstrates the use of Rocoto's **boolean operator tags** in the structured UW YAML, e.g., ``<or>``, ``<not>``, etc. The structure follows the tree in the Rocoto XML language in that each of the subelements of the ``<and>`` tag translates to a subtree in UW YAML. Multiple boolean operator tags can be set at the same level, just as with any other tag type, by adding a descriptive suffix starting with an underscore. In the above example, the ``and:`` key could have equivalently been named ``and_data_files:`` to achieve an identical Rocoto XML result.

Defining Metatasks
------------------

A Rocoto ``metatask`` expands into one or more tasks (defined under the ``var:`` key) via substitution of values. Placeholders bracketed with pound signs are replaced with the values included under the ``var:`` key. Each variable must provide the same number of values. Here is UW YAML that localizes a greeting to a variety of languages:

.. Leaving this one as text because the #'s show up as comments, which is unhelpful

.. code-block:: text

   metatask_greetings:
     var:
       greeting: hello hola bonjour
       person: Jane John Jenn
     task_#greeting#:
       command: "echo #greeting# #world#"
       ...

This translates to Rocoto XML (whitespace added for readability):

.. code-block:: xml

   <metatask name=greetings/>

     <var name="greeting">hello hola bonjour</var>
     <var name="person">Jane John Jenn</var>

     <task name='#greeting#'>

       <command>echo #greeting# #person#<command>
       ...

     </task>
   </metatask>

This example of Rocoto XML will be expanded during the workflow's execution to generate three individual tasks: ``hello``, ``hola``, and ``bonjour``.

UW YAML Definitions
-------------------

In this section, the example in UW YAML will be followed by its representation in Rocoto XML. Please see the :rocoto:`Rocoto documentation<>` for specifics on their use when defining a workflow.

The ``cyclestr:`` Key
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: yaml

   cyclestr:
     value: "/some/path/to/workflow_@Y@m@d@H.log" # required
     attrs:
       offset: "1:00:00"

.. code-block:: xml

   <cyclestr offset="1:00:00">"/some/path/to/workflow_@Y@m@d@H.log"</cyclestr>

The ``workflow:`` Key
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: yaml

   workflow:
     attrs:
       cyclethrottle: 2
       realtime: true # required
       scheduler: slurm # required
       taskthrottle: 20

.. code-block:: xml

   <workflow cyclethrottle="2" realtime="true" scheduler="slurm" taskthrottle="20">
     ...
   </workflow>

Defining Cycles
---------------

At least one ``cycledef:`` is required.

.. code-block:: yaml

   cycledef:
     - attrs:
         group: synop
         activation_offset: "-1:00:00"
       spec: 202301011200 202301021200 06:00:00 # Also accepts crontab-like string
     - attrs:
         group: hourly
       spec: 202301011200 202301021200 01:00:00 # Also accepts crontab-like string

.. code-block:: xml

   <cycledef group="synop" activation_offset="-1:00:00">202301011200 202301021200 06:00:00</cycledef>
   <cycledef group="hourly">202301011200 202301021200 01:00:00</cycledef>

Defining Entities
-----------------

Any number of entities may optionally be specified.

.. code-block:: yaml

   entities:
     FOO: 12
     BAR: baz

.. code-block:: xml

   <?xml version="1.0"?>
   <!DOCTYPE workflow
   [
       <!ENTITY FOO "12">
       <!ENTITY BAR "baz">
   ]>

Defining the Workflow Log
-------------------------

``log:`` is a required entry.

.. code-block:: yaml

   log: /some/path/to/workflow.log

.. code-block:: xml

   <log>/some/path/to/workflow.log</log>

A cycle string may be specified here instead.

.. code-block:: yaml

   log:
     cyclestr:
       value: /some/path/to/workflow_@Y@m@d.log

.. code-block:: xml

   <log><cyclestr>/some/path/to/workflow_@Y@m@d.log</cyclestr></log>

Defining the Set of Tasks
-------------------------

At least one task or metatask must be defined in the ``tasks:`` section.

.. code-block:: yaml

   tasks:
     task_*:
     metatask_*:

The ``task_*:`` Key
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Multiple ``task_*:`` YAML entries may exist under the ``tasks:`` and/or ``metatask_*:`` keys. At least one must be specified per workflow.

.. code-block:: yaml

   task_foo:
     attrs:
       cycledefs: hourly
       maxtries: 2
       throttle: 10
       final: false
     command: echo hello world
     walltime: 00:10:00
     cores: 1

.. code-block:: xml

   <task name="foo" cycledefs="hourly" maxtries="2" throttle="10" final="False">
     ...
   </task>

The following keys take strings values. Please see the :rocoto:`Rocoto documentation<>` for specifics on how to set them.

.. code-block:: yaml

   account:
   exclusive:
   jobname:
   join:
   memory:
   native:
   nodes:
   partition:
   queue:
   rewind:
   shared:
   stderr:
   stdout:

The following UW YAML keys take integer, string, or ``cyclestr:`` values.

.. code-block:: yaml

   command:
   deadline:
   jobname:
   join:
   native:
   stderr:
   stdout:

The ``dependency:`` Key
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``dependency:`` key supports various child options that define task readiness. They may be categorized as boolean operators, comparison operators, and dependencies. Please see the :rocoto:`Rocoto documentation<>` for specifics on how to use any of these dependencies.

Boolean Operator Keys
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Boolean operator keys operate on **one or more additional dependency entries** from any category in their subtrees.

.. code-block:: yaml

   and:
   or:
   not:
   nand:
   nor:
   xor:
   some:

.. code-block:: yaml

   or:
     datadep:
       value: /some/path/to/foo.txt
     taskdep:
       attrs:
         task: foo

.. code-block:: xml

   <dependency>
     <or>
       <datadep>/some/path/to/foo.txt</datadep>
       <taskdep task="foo"/>
     </or>
   </dependency>

Comparison Dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``streq:`` and ``strneq:`` keys compare the values in their ``left:`` and ``right:`` children, and accept ``cyclestr:`` blocks as well as simple strings.

.. code-block:: yaml

   streq:
     left: &FOO;
     right: bar

.. code-block:: xml

   <dependency>
     <streq>
       <left>&FOO;</left>
       <right>bar</right>
     </streq>
   </dependency>

Dependency Keys
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* The ``taskdep:`` key defines a dependency on another task's successful completion:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     taskdep:
       attrs:
         cycle_offset: "-06:00:00"
         state: succeeded
         task: hello # required

  .. code-block:: xml

     <dependency>
       <taskdep task="hello" state="succeeded" cycle_offset="-06:00:00"/>
     </dependency>

* The ``taskvalid`` key defines a dependency on another task being defined in the same cycle. In this example, the task defined with the ``taskvalid:`` dependency would be runnable only if a task ``bar`` were defined in the same cycle:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     validtask:
       attrs:
         task: bar

  .. code-block:: xml

     <dependency>
       <taskvalid task="bar"/>
     </dependency>

* The ``metataskdep:`` key defines a dependency on a metatask:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     metataskdep:
       attrs:
         cycle_offset: "-06:00:00"
         state: succeeded
         metatask: greetings # required
         threshold: 1

  .. code-block:: xml

     <dependency>
       <metataskdep metatask="greetings" state="succeeded" cycle_offset="-06:00:00" threshold="1"/>
     </dependency>

* The ``datadep:`` key defines a dependency on on-disk data:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     datadep:
       attrs:
         age: 120
         minsize: 1024b
       value: /path/to/a/file.txt # required

  .. code-block:: xml

     <dependency>
       <datadep age="120" minsize="1024b">/path/to/a/file.txt</datadep>
     </dependency>

  * The ``value:`` key accepts a ``cyclestr:`` block.

* The ``timedep:`` key defines a dependency on a real-world time:

  .. code-block:: text

     timedep:
       cyclestr:
         value: @Y@m@d@H@M@S

  .. code-block:: xml

     <dependency>
       <timedep><cyclestr>@Y@m@d@H@M@S</cyclestr></timedep>
     </dependency>

  * The ``timedep:`` key will almost certainly want a ``cyclestr:`` block.

* The ``sh:`` key defines a dependency on the successful execution of a shell command:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     sh:
       command: test $(find /some/dir -type f -name "*.grib2" | wc -l) -eq 24

  .. code-block:: xml

     <dependency>
       <sh>test $(find /some/dir -type f -name "*.grib2" | wc -l) -eq 24</sh>
     </dependency>

  * The ``command:`` key accepts a ``cyclestr:`` block.
  * The ``sh:`` key may be suffixed with an underscore and a name to provide a unique name for the dependency, e.g., ``sh_count_grib:`` would translate to XML tag ``<sh name="count_grib">``.
  * The optional attributes ``runopt`` and ``shell`` are accepted under an ``attrs:`` key. See the :rocoto:`Rocoto documentation<>` for details.

The ``metatask:`` Key
---------------------

One or more metatasks may be included under the ``tasks:`` key, or nested under other ``metatask_*:`` keys.

Here is an example of specifying a nested metatask.

.. Leaving this one as text because the #'s show up as comments, which is unhelpful.

.. code-block:: text

   metatask_member:
     attrs:
       mode: parallel
       throttle: 2
     var:
       member: 001 002 003
     metatask_graphics_#member#_field:
       var:
         field: temp u v
       task_graphics_mem#member#_#field#:
         command: "echo $member $field"
         envars:
           member: #member#
           field: #field#
         ...

This will run tasks named:

.. code-block:: text

   graphics_mem001_temp
   graphics_mem002_temp
   graphics_mem003_temp
   graphics_mem001_u
   graphics_mem002_u
   graphics_mem003_u
   graphics_mem001_v
   graphics_mem002_v
   graphics_mem003_v

The XML will look like this:

.. code-block:: xml

   <metatask mode="parallel" name="member" throttle="2">
     <var name="member">001 002 003</var>

     <metatask name="graphics_#member#_field">
       <var name="field">001 002 003</var>

       <task name="graphics_mem#member#_#field#">
         <command>"echo $member $field"</command>
         <envar>
           <name>member</name>
           <value>mem#member#</value>
         </envar>
         <envar>
           <name>field</name>
           <value>#field#</value>
         </envar>
         ...
       </task>

     </metatask>
   </metatask>

* The optional attributes ``mode`` and ``throttle`` are accepted under an ``attrs:`` key. See the :rocoto:`Rocoto documentation<>` for details.

Commit message:

UW-639 Mixed cyclestr / text support (#606)

docs/sections/user_guide/yaml/rocoto.rst, after:

.. _defining_a_workflow:

Defining a Rocoto Workflow
==========================

:rocoto:`Rocoto<>` is a workflow manager widely used by :ufs:`UFS<>` users and developers. It uses a custom XML language to define a set of tasks, their computational resource needs on a batch system, and their dependencies.

To date, it has been challenging to manage XML files that must support a multitude of workflow options. The ``uw rocoto`` tool defines a UW YAML language that can be easily manipulated like any other key/value configuration file and translates it into the syntax required by Rocoto. This enables flexibility to arbitrarily make changes to any workflow while UFS Apps can track the highest priority configurations for Community and Operational use.

Workflow Section
----------------

Starting at the top level of the UW YAML config for Rocoto, there are several required sections. See the example and explanation below:

.. code-block:: yaml

   workflow:
     attrs:
       realtime: false
       scheduler: slurm
     cycledef:
       - attrs:
           activation_offset: -06:00
           group: howdy
         spec: 202209290000 202209300000 06:00:00
     entities:
       ACCOUNT: myaccount
       FOO: test.log
     log: /some/path/to/&FOO;
     tasks:
       ...

UW YAML Keys
^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. note::

   For additional information on Rocoto tags mentioned in this section (e.g., ``<workflow>``, ``<cycledef>``, ``<log>``), please see the :rocoto:`Rocoto documentation<>`.

``attrs:`` -- This section allows users to define any number of the available attributes to the ``<workflow>`` tag in Rocoto's native XML language. Set each with a key/value that matches the exact syntax needed by :rocoto:`Rocoto<>`. These attributes work to fill in the ``<workflow>`` tag. For example:

.. code-block:: xml

   <workflow realtime="false" scheduler="slurm">
   ...
   </workflow>

``cycledef:`` -- This section is a list of grouped cycle definitions for a workflow. Any number of ``cycledef:`` keys is supported. Similar to ``attrs:`` for the ``workflow:`` level, this section has an ``attrs:`` key that follows the exact requirements of those in the Rocoto XML language. The ``spec:`` key is required and supports either the "start, stop, step" syntax, or the "crontab-like" method supported by Rocoto. The example above translates to a single ``<cycledef>`` tag:

.. code-block:: xml

   <cycledef group="howdy">202209290000 202209300000 06:00:00</cycledef>

``entities:`` -- This section defines key/value pairs --- each rendered as ``<!ENTITY key "value">`` --- to translate to named entities (variables) in XML. The example above would yield:

.. code-block:: xml

   <?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
   <!DOCTYPE workflow [
     <!ENTITY ACCOUNT "myaccount">
     <!ENTITY FOO "test.log">
   ]>

``log:`` -- This is a path-like string that defines where to put the Rocoto logs. It corresponds to the ``<log>`` tag. For example:

.. code-block:: xml

   <log>/some/path/to/&FOO;</log>

``tasks:`` -- This section is explained in the `Tasks Section`_.

Using Cycle Strings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``<cyclestr>`` tag in Rocoto transforms specific flags to represent components of the current cycle at run time. For example, an ISO date string like ``2023-01-01T12:00:00`` is represented as ``'@Y-@m-@dT@X'``. See the :rocoto:`Rocoto documentation<>` for full details. In the UW YAML, the ``cyclestr:`` block can be used anywhere that Rocoto will accept a ``<cyclestr>`` to achieve this result. The required structure of a ``cyclestr:`` block is a ``value:``, like this:

.. code-block:: yaml

   entities:
     FOO: test@Y-@m-@dT@X.log
   log:
     cyclestr:
       value: /some/path/to/&FOO;

In the example, the resulting log would appear in the XML file as:

.. code-block:: xml

   <log><cyclestr>/some/path/to/&FOO;</cyclestr></log>

The ``attrs:`` block is optional within the ``cyclestr:`` block and can be used to specify the cycle offset.

Wherever a ``cyclestr:`` block is accepted, a YAML sequence mixing text and ``cyclestr:`` blocks may also be provided. For example,

.. code-block:: yaml

   log:
     - cyclestr:
         value: "%Y%m%d%H"
     - -through-
     - cyclestr:
         attrs:
           offset: "06:00:00"
         value: "%Y%m%d%H"
     - .log

would be rendered as

.. code-block:: xml

   <log><cyclestr>%Y%m%d%H</cyclestr>-through-<cyclestr offset="06:00:00">%Y%m%d%H</cyclestr>.log</log>

Tasks Section
-------------

The ``tasks:`` section is a nested structure that can be arbitrarily deep and defines all the tasks and metatasks in a Rocoto workflow. One or more task or metatask keys are required in this high-level ``tasks:`` section.

Defining Tasks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Let's dissect the following task example:

.. code-block:: yaml

   task_hello:
     attrs:
       cycledefs: howdy
     account: "&ACCOUNT;"
     command: "echo hello $person"
     nodes: 1:ppn=1
     walltime: 00:01:00
     envars:
       person: siri
     dependencies:

Each task is named by its UW YAML key. Blocks under ``tasks:`` prefixed with ``task_`` will be named with what follows the prefix. In the example above the task will be named ``hello`` and will appear in the XML like this:

.. code-block:: xml

   <task name="hello" cycledefs="howdy">
     <jobname>hello</jobname>
     ...
   </task>

where the ``attrs:`` section may set any of the Rocoto-allowed XML attributes. The ``<jobname>`` tag will, by default, use the same name but may be overridden with an explicit ``jobname:`` key under the task.

The name of the task can be any string accepted by Rocoto as a task name (including additional underscores), but must contain the leading ``task_`` to be recognized as a task.

``command:`` -- The command that will be run in the batch job.

``envars:`` -- Any number of key/value pairs defining bash variable names and their corresponding values, to be exported to the environment in which ``<command>`` will run, each rendered in XML like this:

.. code-block:: xml

   <envar>
     <name>person</name>
     <value>siri</value>
   </envar>

``dependencies:`` -- [Optional] Any number of dependencies accepted by Rocoto. This section is described in more detail below.

The other keys not specifically mentioned here follow the same conventions as described in the :rocoto:`Rocoto<>` documentation.

Defining Dependencies for Tasks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Optional dependencies, structured as boolean expressions, define the readiness of a task to run. Dependency specification in YAML is described here; see the :rocoto:`Rocoto documentation<>` for more details.

UW YAML dependency key names should mirror Rocoto XML dependency tag names, optionally suffixed with an underscore followed by an arbitrary descriptor. For example, a ``<streq>`` tag might appear in YAML as ``streq_check_flag:``.

Specifying Tag Attributes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Each of the dependencies that requires attributes (the ``key="value"`` parts inside the XML tag) can be specified with an ``attrs:`` block. For example:

.. code-block:: yaml

   task_hello:
     command: "hello world"
     ...
   task_goodbye:
     command: "goodbye"
     dependencies:
        taskdep:
          attrs:
            task: hello

Here, the ``taskdep:`` dependency says that the ``goodbye`` task cannot run until the ``hello`` task is complete. The resulting Rocoto XML looks like this:

.. code-block:: xml

   <task name="hello">
     ...
   </task>
   <task name="goodbye"/>
     ...
     <dependency>
       <taskdep task="hello"/>
     </dependency>
   </task>

Repeated Dependencies and Boolean Operators
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Because UW YAML represents a hash table (a dictionary in Python), each key at the same level must be unique. To accomplish this in the UW YAML format, any of the dependencies can be specified with an arbitrary unique suffix following an underscore. When duplicates appear at the same level, they *must* have unique names. In the following example, there are multiple data dependencies for the basic ``hello`` task.

.. code-block:: yaml

   task_hello:
     command: "hello world"
     ...
     dependencies:
       and:
         datadep_foo:
           value: "foo.txt"
         datadep_bar:
           value: "bar.txt"

This would result in Rocoto XML in this form:

.. code-block:: xml

   <task name="hello"/>
     ...
     <dependency>
       <and>
         <datadep>"foo.txt"</datadep>
         <datadep>"bar.txt"</datadep>
       </and>
     </dependency>
   </task>

The ``datadep_foo:`` and ``datadep_bar:`` UW YAML keys were named arbitrarily after the first ``_``, but could have been even more descriptive such as ``datadep_foo_file:`` or ``datadep_foo_text:``. The important part is that the YAML key prefix matches the Rocoto XML tag name.

This example also demonstrates the use of Rocoto's **boolean operator tags** in the structured UW YAML, e.g., ``<or>``, ``<not>``, etc. The structure follows the tree in the Rocoto XML language in that each of the subelements of the ``<and>`` tag translates to a subtree in UW YAML. Multiple boolean operator tags can be set at the same level, just as with any other tag type, by adding a descriptive suffix starting with an underscore. In the above example, the ``and:`` key could have equivalently been named ``and_data_files:`` to achieve an identical Rocoto XML result.

Defining Metatasks
------------------

A Rocoto ``metatask`` expands into one or more tasks (defined under the ``var:`` key) via substitution of values. Placeholders bracketed with pound signs are replaced with the values included under the ``var:`` key. Each variable must provide the same number of values. Here is UW YAML that localizes a greeting to a variety of languages:

.. Leaving this one as text because the #'s show up as comments, which is unhelpful

.. code-block:: text

   metatask_greetings:
     var:
       greeting: hello hola bonjour
       person: Jane John Jenn
     task_#greeting#:
       command: "echo #greeting# #world#"
       ...

This translates to Rocoto XML (whitespace added for readability):

.. code-block:: xml

   <metatask name=greetings/>

     <var name="greeting">hello hola bonjour</var>
     <var name="person">Jane John Jenn</var>

     <task name='#greeting#'>

       <command>echo #greeting# #person#<command>
       ...

     </task>
   </metatask>

This example of Rocoto XML will be expanded during the workflow's execution to generate three individual tasks: ``hello``, ``hola``, and ``bonjour``.

UW YAML Definitions
-------------------

In this section, the example in UW YAML will be followed by its representation in Rocoto XML. Please see the :rocoto:`Rocoto documentation<>` for specifics on their use when defining a workflow.

The ``cyclestr:`` Key
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: yaml

   cyclestr:
     value: "/some/path/to/workflow_@Y@m@d@H.log" # required
     attrs:
       offset: "1:00:00"

.. code-block:: xml

   <cyclestr offset="1:00:00">"/some/path/to/workflow_@Y@m@d@H.log"</cyclestr>

The ``workflow:`` Key
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: yaml

   workflow:
     attrs:
       cyclethrottle: 2
       realtime: true # required
       scheduler: slurm # required
       taskthrottle: 20

.. code-block:: xml

   <workflow cyclethrottle="2" realtime="true" scheduler="slurm" taskthrottle="20">
     ...
   </workflow>

Defining Cycles
---------------

At least one ``cycledef:`` is required.

.. code-block:: yaml

   cycledef:
     - attrs:
         group: synop
         activation_offset: "-1:00:00"
       spec: 202301011200 202301021200 06:00:00 # Also accepts crontab-like string
     - attrs:
         group: hourly
       spec: 202301011200 202301021200 01:00:00 # Also accepts crontab-like string

.. code-block:: xml

   <cycledef group="synop" activation_offset="-1:00:00">202301011200 202301021200 06:00:00</cycledef>
   <cycledef group="hourly">202301011200 202301021200 01:00:00</cycledef>

Defining Entities
-----------------

Any number of entities may optionally be specified.

.. code-block:: yaml

   entities:
     FOO: 12
     BAR: baz

.. code-block:: xml

   <?xml version="1.0"?>
   <!DOCTYPE workflow
   [
       <!ENTITY FOO "12">
       <!ENTITY BAR "baz">
   ]>

Defining the Workflow Log
-------------------------

``log:`` is a required entry.

.. code-block:: yaml

   log: /some/path/to/workflow.log

.. code-block:: xml

   <log>/some/path/to/workflow.log</log>

A cycle string may be specified here instead.

.. code-block:: yaml

   log:
     cyclestr:
       value: /some/path/to/workflow_@Y@m@d.log

.. code-block:: xml

   <log><cyclestr>/some/path/to/workflow_@Y@m@d.log</cyclestr></log>

Defining the Set of Tasks
-------------------------

At least one task or metatask must be defined in the ``tasks:`` section.

.. code-block:: yaml

   tasks:
     task_*:
     metatask_*:

The ``task_*:`` Key
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Multiple ``task_*:`` YAML entries may exist under the ``tasks:`` and/or ``metatask_*:`` keys. At least one must be specified per workflow.

.. code-block:: yaml

   task_foo:
     attrs:
       cycledefs: hourly
       maxtries: 2
       throttle: 10
       final: false
     command: echo hello world
     walltime: 00:10:00
     cores: 1

.. code-block:: xml

   <task name="foo" cycledefs="hourly" maxtries="2" throttle="10" final="False">
     ...
   </task>

The following keys take strings values. Please see the :rocoto:`Rocoto documentation<>` for specifics on how to set them.

.. code-block:: yaml

   account:
   exclusive:
   jobname:
   join:
   memory:
   native:
   nodes:
   partition:
   queue:
   rewind:
   shared:
   stderr:
   stdout:

The following UW YAML keys take integer, string, or ``cyclestr:`` values.

.. code-block:: yaml

   command:
   deadline:
   jobname:
   join:
   native:
   stderr:
   stdout:

The ``dependency:`` Key
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``dependency:`` key supports various child options that define task readiness. They may be categorized as boolean operators, comparison operators, and dependencies. Please see the :rocoto:`Rocoto documentation<>` for specifics on how to use any of these dependencies.

Boolean Operator Keys
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Boolean operator keys operate on **one or more additional dependency entries** from any category in their subtrees.

.. code-block:: yaml

   and:
   or:
   not:
   nand:
   nor:
   xor:
   some:

.. code-block:: yaml

   or:
     datadep:
       value: /some/path/to/foo.txt
     taskdep:
       attrs:
         task: foo

.. code-block:: xml

   <dependency>
     <or>
       <datadep>/some/path/to/foo.txt</datadep>
       <taskdep task="foo"/>
     </or>
   </dependency>

Comparison Dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``streq:`` and ``strneq:`` keys compare the values in their ``left:`` and ``right:`` children, and accept ``cyclestr:`` blocks as well as simple strings.

.. code-block:: yaml

   streq:
     left: &FOO;
     right: bar

.. code-block:: xml

   <dependency>
     <streq>
       <left>&FOO;</left>
       <right>bar</right>
     </streq>
   </dependency>

Dependency Keys
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* The ``taskdep:`` key defines a dependency on another task's successful completion:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     taskdep:
       attrs:
         cycle_offset: "-06:00:00"
         state: succeeded
         task: hello # required

  .. code-block:: xml

     <dependency>
       <taskdep task="hello" state="succeeded" cycle_offset="-06:00:00"/>
     </dependency>

* The ``taskvalid`` key defines a dependency on another task being defined in the same cycle. In this example, the task defined with the ``taskvalid:`` dependency would be runnable only if a task ``bar`` were defined in the same cycle:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     validtask:
       attrs:
         task: bar

  .. code-block:: xml

     <dependency>
       <taskvalid task="bar"/>
     </dependency>

* The ``metataskdep:`` key defines a dependency on a metatask:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     metataskdep:
       attrs:
         cycle_offset: "-06:00:00"
         state: succeeded
         metatask: greetings # required
         threshold: 1

  .. code-block:: xml

     <dependency>
       <metataskdep metatask="greetings" state="succeeded" cycle_offset="-06:00:00" threshold="1"/>
     </dependency>

* The ``datadep:`` key defines a dependency on on-disk data:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     datadep:
       attrs:
         age: 120
         minsize: 1024b
       value: /path/to/a/file.txt # required

  .. code-block:: xml

     <dependency>
       <datadep age="120" minsize="1024b">/path/to/a/file.txt</datadep>
     </dependency>

  * The ``value:`` key accepts a ``cyclestr:`` block.

* The ``timedep:`` key defines a dependency on a real-world time:

  .. code-block:: text

     timedep:
       cyclestr:
         value: @Y@m@d@H@M@S

  .. code-block:: xml

     <dependency>
       <timedep><cyclestr>@Y@m@d@H@M@S</cyclestr></timedep>
     </dependency>

  * The ``timedep:`` key will almost certainly want a ``cyclestr:`` block.

* The ``sh:`` key defines a dependency on the successful execution of a shell command:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     sh:
       command: test $(find /some/dir -type f -name "*.grib2" | wc -l) -eq 24

  .. code-block:: xml

     <dependency>
       <sh>test $(find /some/dir -type f -name "*.grib2" | wc -l) -eq 24</sh>
     </dependency>

  * The ``command:`` key accepts a ``cyclestr:`` block.
  * The ``sh:`` key may be suffixed with an underscore and a name to provide a unique name for the dependency, e.g., ``sh_count_grib:`` would translate to XML tag ``<sh name="count_grib">``.
  * The optional attributes ``runopt`` and ``shell`` are accepted under an ``attrs:`` key. See the :rocoto:`Rocoto documentation<>` for details.

The ``metatask:`` Key
---------------------

One or more metatasks may be included under the ``tasks:`` key, or nested under other ``metatask_*:`` keys.

Here is an example of specifying a nested metatask.

.. Leaving this one as text because the #'s show up as comments, which is unhelpful.

.. code-block:: text

   metatask_member:
     attrs:
       mode: parallel
       throttle: 2
     var:
       member: 001 002 003
     metatask_graphics_#member#_field:
       var:
         field: temp u v
       task_graphics_mem#member#_#field#:
         command: "echo $member $field"
         envars:
           member: #member#
           field: #field#
         ...

This will run tasks named:

.. code-block:: text

   graphics_mem001_temp
   graphics_mem002_temp
   graphics_mem003_temp
   graphics_mem001_u
   graphics_mem002_u
   graphics_mem003_u
   graphics_mem001_v
   graphics_mem002_v
   graphics_mem003_v

The XML will look like this:

.. code-block:: xml

   <metatask mode="parallel" name="member" throttle="2">
     <var name="member">001 002 003</var>

     <metatask name="graphics_#member#_field">
       <var name="field">001 002 003</var>

       <task name="graphics_mem#member#_#field#">
         <command>"echo $member $field"</command>
         <envar>
           <name>member</name>
           <value>mem#member#</value>
         </envar>
         <envar>
           <name>field</name>
           <value>#field#</value>
         </envar>
         ...
       </task>

     </metatask>
   </metatask>

* The optional attributes ``mode`` and ``throttle`` are accepted under an ``attrs:`` key. See the :rocoto:`Rocoto documentation<>` for details.
